I'd like to talk about the translation of our publications, and there's a particular
aspect of translation I'd like to comment on.
Now I know that quite a number of you have moved to a country where your mother tongue
isn't spoken, either defined work, or to serve or the need is greater, and others are
serving right at home, but in foreign language congregations.
At times you may have compared an article in your mother tongue with the same article
in your second language, and found differences in the translation, and you might wonder
why that is.
Oh, we'd never conclude that the translators had been unfaithful, or careless, or that
they were running ahead of the organization.
No, we trust our hardworking brothers and sisters.
So we know there must be good reasons for the differences, and the purpose of this brief
discussion is to suggest what some of those reasons might be.
First, a word about one of the principles our translators follow.
They're expected not only to render the thought in the English text accurately, but also
to keep in mind the way people speak.
So accuracy, clarity, and naturalness are needed while maintaining the dignity of our
message.
Now what's involved in preparing a translation does both accurate and natural.
It's not as if the translators are like the Jewish scribes who made copies of the Hebrew
scriptures.
To make sure that the copies they made were accurate in every detail, they would count
not only every word, but also every letter they copied from the source text.
Translation's not like that.
It's not as if there must be seven words in the target language if there are seven words
in the English.
Every word in the English may not be translated, but the complete thought of the English has
to be there.
English makes effective use of repetition.
What do we mean by that?
Well, you can write one sentence in English, then repeat the same thought in slightly different
words in the next sentence, and it sounds fine.
But in some languages, to repeat a thought would be viewed as poor writing, and that wouldn't
reflect well on our publications.
So in such cases, the translators are allowed to combine the two sentences into just one sentence
as long as the thought is completely conveyed.
Or they might make two sentences out of one long English sentence if that's more natural
in the language.
So you can't always compare the length of an English paragraph with the length of the
paragraph in the target language and say, hey, this paragraph is shorter than that paragraph.
Sometimes we hear brothers who have learned a second language say, I don't see why the translators
didn't follow the English word for word.
After all, you can say that in the language.
Well, you may have the words, yet may be possible to say that.
But what a literal translation sounds strange to native speakers.
No matter how well a foreigner has learned a language, native speakers who speak the
language well are usually the best judges of what is natural.
Modesty will help foreign speakers to recognize that.
There's another thing that foreign speakers need to be aware of.
If they're vocal in their criticism of a certain translation, how would that affect
the confidence of native speakers who have to rely on the translation for their spiritual
food?
Of course, nobody's perfect, and as long as translation is done by imperfect people,
it won't be perfect.
But rest assured that our translators take their work very seriously.
The subject of translation is complex, and I'm sure no expert.
Let's hear from some brothers who have worked in the field for many years and see what
we can learn.
Meet Nick Alaris, Nick XRKS, and Sake Moray.
As we have just heard, the goal of translators is to convey ideas accurately, naturally,
and clearly.
This isn't an easy thing to do.
Let's discuss a few of the challenges of translation.
We will focus on three areas and see why translators make the choices they do.
Bible expressions, illustrations, and vocabulary.
So our first point is Bible expressions.
Nick, could you please tell us why translating some expressions in the Bible can be very
challenging?
Well, before our brothers and sisters receive the New World Translation in their language,
they have to use Bibles produced by Christendom.
Often these Bibles contain false religious ideas and terms that reflect those ideas.
So when we produce the New World Translation, great care has to be taken not to allow such
terms to distort our translation.
Can you give us an example of an expression that was translated the wrong way in the Bibles
produced by Christendom?
Well, one example is the term Holy Spirit.
In many Bibles produced by Christendom, the term gives the idea of a spirit creature
in heaven, even a Holy Ghost, sometimes even a Holy Demon.
That must be very confusing to the readers.
But what can the translators do about that?
In many languages, our translators have found that the closest way to translate Holy Spirit
is to say Holy Power or Holy Force.
This may sound very different, but it conveys the same idea.
And even the English New World Translation describes the term Holy Spirit as God's
active force, at Genesis 1-2, while other English translations say God's Holy Spirit.
Good.
So now the brothers can use an expression that is understood by the field and the audience.
But it must be a wonderful thing to have the New World Translation.
Yes, it's a wonderful thing.
But still, the brothers have to get used to the new terms.
Remember that they've been using the original terms in their local Bibles for years to
teach people the truth, but as they get used to the new terminology and their personal
study at meetings and in the ministry, they begin to see the benefits of the new terms
and afterward they really embrace the New World Translation.
Thank you.
Now, let us go to the second challenge, illustrations.
Why are illustrations particularly difficult to translate?
An illustration that works in one culture might not work in another.
Illustrations are only effective if the reader can relate to them.
And that's why Jesus used illustrations based on everyday things that his audience
was familiar with, such as farming, building, fishing.
And today our publications use illustrations that people can relate to.
I remember an article I discussed the need for us to be patient in difficult situations.
And it used the illustration of a driver who is stuck in traffic.
Now, one translation team wrote to the translator help desk and they explained that most of
the readers were not familiar with traffic jams.
For someone who lives in a big city, that sounds unbelievable, but it's true.
So the team wanted to use a different illustration.
They are familiar with the idea of people standing in long lines waiting for their maze
or corn to be ground at the milling machine.
And this illustration was approved because it would help the readers get the point
they need to be patient.
Now, these are completely different illustrations, but the point or the message is the same.
For example, then about being patient.
Now, when we read in our language edition of the Watchtower or other publication,
a different illustration than the one we read in English,
we can be confident that the translators received approval to make this adjustment
so that the right messages conveyed.
Well, that was very helpful.
Thank you.
Now, let us go to our third challenge, that of vocabulary.
That is the words that are used in a language.
Now, we might assume that for every important word in our language,
that they will be an exact equivalent in another language.
Well, translation is much more complicated than that.
Take, for example, the word piece.
Some years back, we had a convention about godly peace.
And one might think, well, that's an easy word to translate.
But that word was used about 350 times in talks on the convention,
sometimes referring to peace between God and man,
sometimes referring to peace in family or with our neighbors,
and other times referring to peace of mind.
Now, in some language, there's simply no way to use one word
to convey all those aspects of peace,
because they have one word for the kind of peace that God gives,
a different word when there's no war in a country, that kind of peace,
and a different word to indicate that people are getting along with one another.
So those translators need to understand the point of each usage in the context
and then convey the right translation accordingly.
Now, it opens our mind to how wonderfully Jehovah made us,
with the capacity to think and feel and have many concepts and ideas,
and to have the ability to express it in our language,
in other words, use words for that.
But we express them in so many different ways.
Yes, this is so true.
Every language has its own vocabulary and way of expressing things.
What I find very interesting is how other languages render
standard expressions that we use as Jehovah's Witnesses,
for example, field service, circuit overseer, kingdom hold,
special pioneer.
Those expressions were first used in English,
and then translators had to come up with equivalents in their languages
so that it would make sense.
But that wouldn't be difficult, would it be?
Because for the word kingdom, surely we have another word and another language,
and for the word hall, we have an equivalent word,
and all you have to do is put the two words together to translate kingdom all.
They may have the words, but a literal translation of kingdom hold
could mean something totally different.
Now, some countries still have a king.
In those places, this kingdom hold could mean government office,
or it could mean hall belonging to the kingdom of Jehovah's Witnesses,
so that would be totally misleading.
And that's why the governing body has given approval to say
the meeting place of Jehovah's Witnesses,
or the hall of Jehovah's Witnesses.
Even though the expressions sound a little bit different,
the basic intent is the same, and people get the right idea.
So it is obvious that the challenges of translation are huge.
But now the question, how can a newly formed translation team,
or one in a very remote location,
have the confidence and have the assurance that they produce the highest standard possible?
Well, all translation teams, regardless of size or location,
benefit from regular communication with the writing committee of the governing body.
Well, we understand that the governing body directs matters from headquarters.
But do they really know what the translators are doing?
Well, the writing committee trusts the translators.
But at the same time, they don't try to micromanage their work.
What they have done is set in place training programs
to teach translators basic translation principles
to help them to understand how to apply those principles
when translating the publications.
And this ensures that the same message is being conveyed regardless of language.
And when they're not sure that their solution is exactly right on target,
they can write to the writing committee and ask for direction to inquire
whether this solution conveys the right idea and the context.
Also, the writing committee answers hundreds of translation questions every week
as part of the ongoing training of the teams.
All of the translators have access to these answers
so that they can learn from one another
on how to solve problems which are delicate and difficult.
And this effective communication system really helps
to unify the thinking of all the translators
and make sure that they all produce the same message.
And that unifies the thinking of the worldwide field.
Well, thank you very much for explaining those factors affecting translation.
And it is impressive that Jehovah has an arrangement in place
that reverses the effect of Bable.
And it is also so wonderful that by means of his Holy Spirit,
Jehovah unifies his people around the earth
regardless of what language they use.
Thanks, brothers.
You've given us an even deeper appreciation for all the work involved
in making a quality translation.
I learned a lot, and I'm sure our audience did, too.